README.md, before:

# Scabbard ⚔️

Scabbard is a deterministic (i.e., config-based) static site generator (SSG) built on top of Laravel and Blade. It provides a zero-dependency workflow for generating static sites from your Laravel views.

Features:

- **File watching** 👀  – Monitors specified directories for changes
- **Static builds** 🔨  – Outputs your site to a target directory (`output/` by default)
- **Hot rebuilding** 🔥 – Rebuilds automagically when changes are detected
- **Local server** 🧑🏽‍💻   – Serves the site locally on the port of your choice

All built in pure PHP.

To start the dev server, run:

```
php artisan scabbard:serve
```

And you're off to the races! 🏇🏻

## Installation

```
composer require dempe/scabbard --dev
php artisan vendor:publish --tag=scabbard-config
```

## Configuration

Configs are in `config/scabbard.php`.

### Static Routes

Map of routes to output filenames.

Each route (i.e., each key in the array) must be declared in a Laravel routes file (e.g., `routes/web.php`). This is because Scabbard calls Laravel for each route allowing you to use controllers or other additional processing.

Note: these are *static* routes (dynamic routes are handled separately).

**Example**:

```php
'routes' => [
    '/blog/about' => 'blog/about/index.html',
],
```

### Dynamic Routes

Dynamic routes allow generating multiple pages from a single route pattern.

Each dynamic route defined must map to:

1. `output`: the name of the file you want the parsed view to be written to.
2. `values`: Specify both a *model* and an *attribute* in `Class@attribute` notation.

During the build, Scabbard will call `pluck` on the model for the specified attribute (e.g., `App\Models\Post::pluck('slug');`) and generate a new file for each.

**Example**:

```php
'dynamic_routes' => [
    '/posts/{slug}' => [
        'output' => '/posts/{slug}/index.html',
        'values' => 'App\\Models\\Post@slug',
    ],
],
```

### Directories to Watch

These directories trigger a new build if they're updated while you're running the server.

**Default**: `public`, `app`, `resources`.

### Output Directory

Where to build the static site.

**Default**: `./output`.

### Directories to Copy

These are directories that are copied wholesale into your configured output directory.

**Default**: `./public`.

### Fingerprint Patterns

Specify which files should be fingerprinted during the build. Patterns use
shell-style wildcards (e.g., `**/*.css`). Fingerprinted filenames will include a
hash based on file content and all HTML and CSS files will have their references
updated accordingly.
Note: only `href` and `src` attributes with quoted values, and `url()` references in CSS are rewritten. Any query strings or fragments are preserved.

**Default**: `[]` (no fingerprinting).

### Server Port

The port your server runs on. 

**Default**: `8000`.

### 404 Page

The 404 page that `scabbard:serve` will use. The path should be relative to your output directory.

**Default**:  `/404.html`.

## Additional Commands

### Build

This builds the site once and exits (useful for CICD):

```
php artisan scabbard:build
```

Use the `--watch` flag to enable hot rebuilds without running a server:

```
php artisan scabbard:build --watch
```


## Static Analysis

This project uses [PHPStan](https://phpstan.org/) for static code analysis. Run:

```
composer phpstan
```

to analyze the codebase.

## Notes

- Works with Laravel 10 and above.
- Scabbard does not require JavaScript, npm, or Node.js.
- You can use any Blade features you normally would in Laravel.

## Roadmap

- [ ] Markdown parsing
- [ ] Frontmatter parsing
- [ ] Syntax highlighting
- [ ] Deployment
- [ ] (Maybe) Add option to render raw views directly without going through app (useful if you have a set of pure Blade templates)

Commit message:

Update readme with draft info

README.md, after:

# Scabbard ⚔️

Scabbard is a deterministic (i.e., config-based) static site generator (SSG) built on top of Laravel and Blade. It provides a zero-dependency workflow for generating static sites from your Laravel views.

Features:

- **File watching** 👀  – Monitors specified directories for changes
- **Static builds** 🔨  – Outputs your site to a target directory (`output/` by default)
- **Hot rebuilding** 🔥 – Rebuilds automagically when changes are detected
- **Local server** 🧑🏽‍💻   – Serves the site locally on the port of your choice
- **Fingerprinting** ☝🏼 - Fingerprint your static assets
- **Drafts** 📄         - Skip publishing posts marked with `draft: true` in their YAML frontmatter

All built in pure PHP.

To start the dev server, run:

```
php artisan scabbard:serve
```

And you're off to the races! 🏇🏻

If you want to include your drafts (`draft: true` in your YAML frontmatter),

```
php artisan scabbard:serve --drafts
```

## Installation

```
composer require dempe/scabbard --dev
php artisan vendor:publish --tag=scabbard-config
```

## Configuration

Configs are in `config/scabbard.php`.

### Static Routes

Map of routes to output filenames.

Each route (i.e., each key in the array) must be declared in a Laravel routes file (e.g., `routes/web.php`). This is because Scabbard calls Laravel for each route allowing you to use controllers or other additional processing.

Note: these are *static* routes (dynamic routes are handled separately).

**Example**:

```php
'routes' => [
    '/blog/about' => 'blog/about/index.html',
],
```

### Dynamic Routes

Dynamic routes allow generating multiple pages from a single route pattern.

Each dynamic route defined must map to:

1. `output`: the name of the file you want the parsed view to be written to.
2. `values`: Specify both a *model* and an *attribute* in `Class@attribute` notation.

During the build, Scabbard will call `pluck` on the model for the specified attribute (e.g., `App\Models\Post::pluck('slug');`) and generate a new file for each.

**Example**:

```php
'dynamic_routes' => [
    '/posts/{slug}' => [
        'output' => '/posts/{slug}/index.html',
        'values' => 'App\\Models\\Post@slug',
    ],
],
```

### Directories to Watch

These directories trigger a new build if they're updated while you're running the server.

**Default**: `public`, `app`, `resources`.

### Output Directory

Where to build the static site.

**Default**: `./output`.

### Directories to Copy

These are directories that are copied wholesale into your configured output directory.

**Default**: `./public`.

### Drafts

Specify your content directories in the config file at `content_directories`.  Scabbard will parse the YAML frontmatter.  If `draft: true` is set, these files will not be added to the build by default.  If you want to include them, pass the `--drafts` option.

### Fingerprint Patterns

Specify which files should be fingerprinted during the build. Patterns use
shell-style wildcards (e.g., `**/*.css`). Fingerprinted filenames will include a
hash based on file content and all HTML and CSS files will have their references
updated accordingly.
Note: only `href` and `src` attributes with quoted values, and `url()` references in CSS are rewritten. Any query strings or fragments are preserved.

**Default**: `[]` (no fingerprinting).

### Server Port

The port your server runs on. 

**Default**: `8000`.

### 404 Page

The 404 page that `scabbard:serve` will use. The path should be relative to your output directory.

**Default**:  `/404.html`.

## Additional Commands

### Build

This builds the site once and exits (useful for CICD):

```
php artisan scabbard:build
```

Use the `--watch` flag to enable hot rebuilds without running a server:

```
php artisan scabbard:build --watch
```


## Static Analysis

This project uses [PHPStan](https://phpstan.org/) for static code analysis. Run:

```
composer phpstan
```

to analyze the codebase.

## Notes

- Works with Laravel 10 and above.
- Scabbard does not require JavaScript, npm, or Node.js.
- You can use any Blade features you normally would in Laravel.

## Roadmap

- [ ] Markdown parsing
- [ ] Syntax highlighting
- [ ] Deployment
- [ ] (Maybe) Add option to render raw views directly without going through app (useful if you have a set of pure Blade templates)
